.\" ident	@(#)Path:man/intro.3	3.2
.\"
.\" C++ Standard Components, Release 3.0.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992 AT&T and UNIX System Laboratories, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 1988, 1989, 1990 AT&T.  All Rights Reserved.
.\"
.\" THIS IS UNPUBLISHED PROPRIETARY SOURCE CODE OF AT&T and UNIX System
.\" Laboratories, Inc.  The copyright notice above does not evidence
.\" any actual or intended publication of such source code.
.\" 
.TH \f3intro\fP \f3Path(3C++)\fP " "
.SH NAME
intro \- introduction to the Path component
.SH DESCRIPTION
The facilities of \f3Path(3C++)\f1 contain
most of the functionality users need
when manipulating UNIX path names and UNIX search paths.
Functionality includes:
automatic path canonicalization, path relativization,
wildcard expansion, path completion, and
searching in search paths.
\f3Path(3C++)\f1 also contains a replacement for
the assorted temporary path name construction
facilities of \f3mktemp(3)\f1, \f3tempnam(3)\f1, and
\f3tmpnam(3)\f1.  
Finally, \f3Path(3C++)\f1 provides an interface to 
the Korn shell \f3test(1)\f1 predicate that works 
regardless of whether the user is running the Korn shell.
.PP
There are four manual entries:
.IP "\f3Path(.)\f1"
UNIX path names.  Automatic canonicalization,
path relativization, wildcard expansion, path completion.
.br
.IP "\f3Search_path(.)\f1"
Constructing and searching in UNIX search paths.
.br
.IP "\f3Tmppath(.)\f1"
A replacement for 
\f3mktemp\f1(3), \f3tempnam\f1(3), and \f3tmpnam(3)\f1.
.br
.IP "\f3ksh_test(.)\f1"
Interface to the Korn shell \f3test(1)\f1 predicate.
Works regardless of whether or not 
the user is running \f3ksh(1)\f1.
.br
.SH SEE ALSO
.Bf
\f3access(2)\fP,
\f3basename(1)\fP,
\f3dirname(1)\fP,
\f3getenv(3C)\fP,
\f3getwd(3C)\fP,
\f3intro(2)\fP,
\f3ksh(1)\fP,
\f3ksh_test(.)\fP,
\f3List(3C++)\fP,
\f3mktemp(3)\fP ,
\f3Objection(3C++)\fP,
\f3Path(.)\fP,
\f3Search_path(.)\fP,
\f3stat(2)\fP,
\f3String(3C++)\fP,
\f3tempnam(3)\fP,
\f3tmpfile(3)\fP,
\f3tmpnam(3)\fP,
\f3Tmppath(.)\fP.
.Be
