.\" ident	@(#)incl:man/incl.1	3.2
.\"
.\" C++ Standard Components, Release 3.0.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992 AT&T and UNIX System Laboratories, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 1988, 1989, 1990 AT&T.  All Rights Reserved.
.\"
.\" THIS IS UNPUBLISHED PROPRIETARY SOURCE CODE OF AT&T and UNIX System
.\" Laboratories, Inc.  The copyright notice above does not evidence
.\" any actual or intended publication of such source code.
.\" 
.TH \f3incl.sh\f1 \f31C++\f1 " "
.SH NAME
incl.sh \- produce #include hierarchy for C and C++ source code
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B
incl.sh [ \-Aklv ] [ \-b \f2boxName\fP ] [ \-h \f2height\fP ] [ \-L \f2language\fP ] [ \-o \f2base\fP ] [ \-w \f2width\fP ] [ \-I \f2include-directory\fP ] \f2file\fP ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
\f3incl.sh\f1
prints the #include hierarchy for the C++ source code contained,
directly or indirectly, 
in the given collection of files.
In the absence of any 
.B \-L
options,
the standard output consists of lines of the form
.sp
.Bf 
    A #includes B
.Be
.sp
where A and B are file names, and A #include's B.
Notice that all files, including those directly or indirectly included
by the specified files, are searched for #include's.
.SS "Output languages"
If graphic output is desired, the 
.B \-L
option can be used.
The output language can be any of
"ps" (postscript), "dag", "pic", "tex", or "dvi".
Multiple 
.B \-L
options are allowed.
\f3incl.sh\f1
places its output for these languages in the file(s)
.BI inclout. ext,
where
.I ext
is the name of the language.
.PP
If any of the input files to 
\f3incl.sh\f1
is \f3dag(1)\f1 source, (presumably produced by a previous run of 
\f3incl.sh\f1), 
then the #include graph contained therein is incorporated into the current graph.
It is up to the user to make certain that the settings of the 
.BR a ", " i ,
and
.B n
options which were used to produce the input \f3dag\f1(1) source match the current settings.
.PP
TeX output produced by 
\f3incl.sh\f1
can be included in any \f3tex(1)\f1 or \f3latex(1)\f1 document by the following sequence of commands:
.sp
.Bf
    \\input{inclout}
    \\centerline{\\box\\graph}
.Be
.sp
where 
.B inclout.tex 
is the TeX file produced by
\f3incl.sh\f1.
.PP
Additional options to
\f3incl.sh\f1
are as follows:
.TP 13
.B \-k
Only print the file names, not the enclosing <> or "" characters.
See "bugs" for why you would want to do this.
.TP
.B \-l
Print full path names of files (the default is to print the name as it appears
in the first file scanned that #includes it).
.TP
.BI \-I " include-directory"
Search in
.IR include-directory
when looking for #include files.
These directories are searched in order, followed by
the standard C++ include directory (defined in the
\f3incl.sh\f1 shell script), followed by 
\fB/usr/include\fP.
If a file is not found, a warning message is printed on stderr.
.PP
The following options apply only to graphic output specified by 
.B \-L:
.TP
.B \-A 
Print ascii output on the standard output in addition to any output(s) specified by 
.B \-L.
.TP
.B \-v
Orient the #include graph vertically rather than horizontally.
.TP 
.BI \-b " boxName"
(With \fB\-Ltex\fR.)  Make 
.IR boxName ,
rather than "graph", be the name of the box defined by the TeX code.
.TP
.BI \-w " width," " \-h " height
Scale the graph
.I width
inches wide,
.I height
inches high. 
.I width 
and 
.I height
should be dimensionless inches, e.g., \-h5.2.  
The default graph size is 8.5x10.
.TP
.BI \-o " base"
Use 
.IR base ,
rather than 
.BR inclout ,
as the base name for all output files.  
.I base 
may be any arbitrary path name; any extension on
.I base
is ignored.
.SH EXAMPLE
.RS
.PP
.B 
incl.sh -L tex -L dvi *.h
.RE
.PP
produces page-sized TeX and dvi versions of the #include hierarchy for 
the header files in the current directory.  The outputs are on
.B inclout.tex
and
.BR inclout.dvi ,
respectively.
(Notice that 
.B inclout.dvi 
is 
.I not
what one would get by directly running \f1tex(1)\f1 on
.BR inclout.tex .)
.SH SEE ALSO
\f3hier(1C++)\f1, \f3postscript(1)\f1, \f3dag(1)\f1, \f3pic(1)\f1, \f3tex(1)\f1, \f3latex(1)\f1
.SH BUGS
\f3incl.sh\f1
performs its own expansion of #include directives, instead of
analyzing the output of ``CC -E'' (see \f3CC(1C++)\f1).
This means that IT IS POSSIBLE FOR THE OUTPUT OF 
\f3incl.sh\f1 TO BE DIFFERENT FROM THE ACTUAL #include HIERARCHY
EXPANDED AT COMPILE TIME.
This bug should probably be removed in a future release.
.PP
Some versions of tpic (the pic-to-TeX converter)
gets confused by quotes appearing around file names; use the
-k flag in this case to suppress the quotes.

