.\" ident	@(#)publik:man/publik.1	3.2
.\"
.\" C++ Standard Components, Release 3.0.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992 AT&T and UNIX System Laboratories, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 1988, 1989, 1990 AT&T.  All Rights Reserved.
.\"
.\" THIS IS UNPUBLISHED PROPRIETARY SOURCE CODE OF AT&T and UNIX System
.\" Laboratories, Inc.  The copyright notice above does not evidence
.\" any actual or intended publication of such source code.
.\" 
.TH \f3publik\f1 \f31C++\f1 " "
.SH NAME
publik \- find and print the public parts of class/template definitions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B 
publik [ \-clmp ] [ \fIcpp options\fB ] 
.IR file " ..."
.SH DESCRIPTION
\f3publik\f1
prints the public portions of all class/template definitions contained, directly or indirectly,
in the list of input files.
If a class/template contains nested classes/templates, then only the ``upwardly public''
portions of nested classes/templates are printed.
.PP
Options modify the behavior of
\f3publik\f1
as follows:
.TP 6
.B \-c
Do not print comments.  
(Normally both the C-style and C++-style comments in the public portions of classes/templates are printed.)
.TP 6
.B \-l
Print 
\f3cpp(1)\f1-style 
line directives showing the location of each class/template definition.
.TP 6
.B \-m
Print the bodies of any member functions defined in their respective classes/templates.  (Normally omitted.)
.TP 6
.B \-p
Print the ``public:'' keyword in the appropriate places.  
(Normally omitted, since everything printed is public.)
.SH WARNINGS
The class/template definitions output by 
\f3publik\f1
are not equivalent to their actual definitions, so do not
use them in C++ source code.
.SH BUGS
\f3publik\f1
is spelled with a `k' in order to evade a problem with 
\f3man(1)\f1
on some machines.
